---
layout: post
title: Review on the Universal Studio of Florida
---

My boyfriend and I visited universal studio and island of adventure for 2 days during Christmas (I agree, bad timing indeed). Some rides and shows were quite fascinating and beyond our imagination. However, betweens the those rides were 15-155 min waiting time in the queues. Right next to the normal queues with expected waiting time written, there are *EXPRESS LANES*. "Get to the Fun Faster", as noted in the website, express cards are ~ $100 per person per park. We never understand addition cost beyond the $100+ per day per person admission so we didn't purchase express. Hence we had a lot of time waiting, observing, staring, and coming up with a hypothesis of how NBCUniversal (referred as *the park* below) plays behavior science and hide half of the truth to HURT the experience of normal visitors.

Here are our findings: "Get to the Fun Faster" for express holders means "Get to the Fun MUCH Slower" for normal visitors.

That sounds obvious, right? We did some quick math to estimate "how much slower".

Assuming there are 600 visitors waiting for a ride, which takes 10 visitors per minute. If you just reach the end of the queue, what is your waiting time?


1) If everybody has normal access, it takes 600/10 = 60 minutes
Hmm, not bad, huh?

2) If 10% (60) of visitors have express access, 90% (540) have normal access, we have a very different story. Let's say our coordinating staff is very kind, every minute, 5 express and 5 normal would board the ride (fair, isn't it?)

If you have express, it takes you 60/5 = 12 minutes
If you JUST have normal, it takes you 540/5 = 108 minutes !!!!!!
         
Does it sounds familiar? 105 minutes waiting time for Hagrid's Magical Creatures Motorbike Adventure?

Sometimes the coordinating staff favors express (after all, they paid $100 more). Let's say they let 7 express and 3 normal in per minute (BTW, we did observe 9 express and 1 normal in some rides). What are the waiting time now?

If you have express, it takes you 60/7 = 9 minutes
If you JUST have normal, it takes you ... 540/3 = 180 minutes !!!!!!

A gentle reminder that everybody wait for 60 minutes without the express system.


No offense to whomever purchased express. After all, who stays calm when they see in the big screen that Harry Potter and the Escape from Gringotts takes 155 minutes waiting time? The strong psychological hint, the fear that the whole day would be wasted in queue, the expectations of kids and loved ones, and the glowing ads everywhere with the savior information "Get to the Fun Faster"....where the slowness is created by the faster express in the beginning. Ironically, a snake bites into its own tail.

Furthermore, it the 155 minutes really 155 minutes? As we calculated before, the staff can easily manipulate it, or the system could be exaggerating to create more fear. Behavior science, a magic spell without Harry Potter's wand.

In our own observation, whenever the normal line is long, the staffs tend to go 50% normal lane and 50% express lane boarding (to avoid 180 minutes shows up too often, we guess); whenever the normal line is short, the staffs tend to go 5% normal and 95% express boarding (We were waiting for Kang & Kodos' Twirl 'n' Hurl, the staff always empty express lane before letting any normal lane visitors in. It had been 25 minutes waiting to start with. After 10 min, it was still 25 minutes. After another 5 minutes, the waiting became 15 minutes, before some normal lane vistors got furious and stormed out the queue)

You get what you pay for and express buyers paid more to get shorter waiting time, some might say. That is true. Agreements between the park and the express buyers are totally fine. What is not fulfilled, is the agreements between the park and the normal visitors. There was never a note saying "express ticket holders might largely increase your waiting time and hurt your experience" before purchasing the normal ticket. It is actually a ticket with hidden uncertain caveat.    


Imagine an airline company which offers luggage privilege to first-class flyers. They can have 2 carry-ons. And there is the economic class ticket which allows one carry-on. There are scenarios when there is no space for carry-ons for economic class flyers. So the airline company offers *FREE* checked bags. Yes, they COMPENSATE when economic class flyers don't have the full service they deserve.        

What does the park do when their policies hurt normal visitors for real? Send them express ads hoping to EARN MORE MONEY. Even the express holders got ripped off little by little. The more express cards the park sells, the worse experience express holders have. In the end, everybody has express, and we are back to 60 minutes waiting time. Only the park earns MUCH MUCH MORE.

In short, universal parks hide the waiting time CAVEATS, trick visitors into additional PAYMENTS and PUNISH whoever does not obey. 


