---
layout: post
title: Dunder method in Python
---

+ **Environment**: This article's Python version is CPython3.9.9 from [deadsnake](https://github.com/deadsnakes/python3.9) 
running on `Ubuntu 18.04`. 


In Python, there are some special attributes of a class or object starting and ending with two consecutive underscores 
"`__`", for example, `__init__`. They are usually called "Dunder method" or "magic" method. The latter name originates from the
fact that these methods are usually fairly mysterious for Python beginners. This post will demystify 
these Dunder methods through analogy of similar concepts in other general programming languages. 

In the official document of Python, all the details of these special methods are categorized under the standard data model
of Python: [Special Method Names](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#special-method-names). Briefly speaking, 
there methods with double underscores, *is Python’s approach to operator overloading, allowing classes to define their own behavior with respect to language operators*. 

## Typical dunder methods

Let's start with `__str__` method. It is called by the built-in method `str()` and other text-formatting method such as
`print()` or `format()`. It is similar to Java's `toString()` method associated with every object. The following is an example
of overriding this method. 

```python3
class MyStringClass:
    def __init__(self, var):
        self.var = var
        
    def __str__(self):
        return "My String Class Value:" + str(self.var)
    
if __name__ == '__main__':
    my_str_class = MyStringClass(6)
    print(my_str_class)
```

The output is
```
My String Class Value:6
```

If you comment out the overrided `__str__` method. It will output 
```
<__main__.MyStringClass object at 0x7f8cf1777fd0>
```
The latter output indicates where the object is stored, but it does not show the actual value wrapped in the class. This 
behavior is related to the builtin(default) method's implementation of `__str__`. In CPython's implementation standard,
when the `__str__` method is missing, the `__repr__` method to obtain the object address. The `__repr__` method provides
an "official" string representation of an object, mostly used by the interpreter. You can verify
it with the following definition:
```python
class MyStringClass:
    def __init__(self, var):
        self.var = var
    
    def __new__(cls, *args, **kwargs):
        cls.__init__()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    my_str_class = MyStringClass(6)
    print(my_str_class)
    print(hex(id(my_str_class)))
```
Note: 
+ This above behavior is only related to the standard CPython's implementation. Other Python interpreters might have
their own behaviors.

### Other Simple cases

Similar to `__str__(self)`, there are other simple cases of these dunder methods that can be invoked through a built-in method. 
For example, [`hash()`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#help) calls `__hash__(self)` method, and it is also used
in `set` or `fronzenset`; `bool()` calls the `__bool__(self)` method of a instantiated object; etc. These methods are similar to
`XYZ-able` interfaces in Java world. When any class implements these interfaces, they need to provide a corresponding implementations
explicitly in that subclass. In Python, things are much simpler(... or more error-prone at runtime, :P) thanks to dynamic typing. 

### Operator overloading

Special methods also allows operator **overloading** or keywords overloading, such as `+`, `+=`, `in` etc. These semantics
are called "emulating" in Python. Refer to:
+ [Emulating Numeric Types](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#emulating-numeric-types): `Number` class in Java
+ [Emulating Callables](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#emulating-callable-objects): `Function<T, R>` interface in Java 
+ [Emulating Generics](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#emulating-generic-types): reflections in Java
+ [Emulating Container Types](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#emulating-container-types): `Iterable` interface in Java

These relations between Java concepts and Python concepts are not precisely 1-1 related. However, you can find some similarities
that help you understand how Python works internally. 

Python even allows you to overload [`with` statement as context managers](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#with-statement-context-managers).
It comes with a pair of methods: `__enter__` and `__exit__`. This allows you to have a full control over closeable resources within a specialized class, 
similar to `try(...){ }` semantics in Java. The following is a mock example:

```python
class SafeDatabaseConnection:

    def __enter__(self):
        # initialize a db connection and return it
        ...
        return self.dbconn

    def __exit__(self, exc_type, exc_value, traceback):
        # close the db connection after context expires.
        self.dbconn.close()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    with SafeDatabaseConnection() as mydbconn:
        # do something
        pass
```

## Higher-level of designs 

Overall, these dunder methods are simple but super powerful. They allow you to program in an objective-oriented way like
many other OOP languages. Instead of inheriting base classes or implementing interfaces like `XYZable` (what you must do in Java),
you can simply override dunder methods in your own class and use [built-in functions](https://docs.python.org/3.9/library/functions.html)
or keywords such as `with` or `in` immediately with your own customized classes. 

If you think about this problem in the other way, these `built-in` functions are not only simply "functions", but also 
genuinely built-in "patterns". Many Python libraries follow these standard "functions/patterns" to design their software structure. For example, 
[Keras Layer](https://github.com/keras-team/keras/blob/master/keras/engine/base_layer.py#L982) is a callable in Python. 
Understanding and programming in these "built-in" patterns let your code follow Python's conventions. Consider the following
class definition. If you define a 2-D point with `(x, y)` coordinate, naturally you want to let them become add-able. 
Then you can override the `__add__` method to allow the operator `+` to be able to compose them in a straight-forward way. 

```python
class Point:

    def __init__(self, x, y):
        self.x = x
        self.y = y

    def __add__(self, other):
        return Point(self.x + other.x, self.y +other.y)

    def __str__(self):
        return "x_coor:{}, y_coor:{}".format(self.x, self.y)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    p1 = Point(1, 2)
    p2 = Point(3, 4)
    print(p1 + p2)
    # output "x_coor:4, y_coor:6"
```

These pre-defined methods encourage programmers to think more about the inherent algebra relations through these built-in 
functions, and how to fit these inherent algebra relations into the built-in functions/paradigms.

## Controlled class initialization

Python has very few "black" magic when instantiating a class. There is no implicit initialization order of attributes when you
initialize a derived class. If anything from the base class is needed, for example, calling base-class constructors, you 
will have to use `super().__init__(...)` explicitly. 

### Basics: object lifecycles with `__init__`, `__new__` and `__del__`

---
`__new__(cls, [...])` is a **static** method that takes the class of which an instance was requested as its first argument. 
The remaining arguments are those passed to the object constructor expression and the return value is **usually** an instance
of the object. There might be an exception if you customize the class initialization process (see below). 

> + If `__new__()` is invoked during object construction and it returns an instance of cls, 
> then the new instance’s `__init__()` method will be invoked like `__init__(self[, ...])`, where self is the new instance and 
> the remaining arguments are the same as were passed to the object constructor.

> + If `__new__()` does not return an instance of cls, then the new instance’s `__init__()` method will not be invoked.

---
> `__init__(self, [...])` is probably the most popular dunder method across Python projects. It is called after an instance
> is created by the `__new__` method but before returning to the caller.  If a base class has an `__init__()` method, the 
> derived class’s `__init__()` method, if any, must explicitly call it to ensure proper initialization of the base class 
> part of the instance; for example: `super().__init__([args...])`.

---
`__del__(self)` is called before the instance is destroyed, e.g. collected by Garbage Collector. Many folks, especially those
with C++ background, might call it as "destructor" but the newest Python doc suggests that it is not a good name because 
any languages with GC is not suitable for RAII (Resource Acquisition Is Initialization), as the instance's deletion time 
is not under programmer's control. (See [Destructor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Destructor_(computer_programming)))

Note: 
+ `del x` doesn’t directly call `x.__del__()` — the former decrements the reference count for x by one, 
and the latter is only called when x’s reference count reaches zero. By design, `del` is a keyword instead of a built-in
function to avoid confusion. 
+ `__del__` and `__delete__` are different! The latter is used to delete an attribute of Python object. 

### Advanced: Customize the class initialization

**Caution: Avoid using this feature in your work unless you know the exact effect of your code. 
Customizing class initialization makes your code deviates from Python standard and usually do 
more harm than good**. However, understanding how it works might help you understand Python internals 
libraries better. 

These dunder methods allow us to 
[revisit and revise the standard Python class creation](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#customizing-class-creation). 

It leverages two major methods to modify classes.
#### `__set_name__(self, owner, name)`

This method is automatically called at the time the owning class `owner` is created. 
The object has been assigned to `name` in class `owner`. Here is a pair of examples of how this method is invoked from 
Python's official doc. 
```python
class A:
    
    x = C()  # This is a class varaible bound to the class itself. Automatically calls: x.__set_name__(A, 'x')
```

```python
class A:
   pass

c = C()
A.x = c                  # The hook is not called. But you injected a class variable to the class itself. 
c.__set_name__(A, 'x')   # Manually invoke the hook
```

#### `__init_subclass__(cls)`

This method is called while the a subclass of a class is initialized. 

#### Metaclass

The above two methods are only elementary approach to manipulate single changes of class initialization. To make class 
initialization more systematic, `metaclass` comes into the play. It is also probably the most useful piece of "customizing" 
your own class definition.

Before diving into what `metaclass` is, let's look at what `class` is. My favorite definition is from the book 
[Essential Scala](https://books.underscore.io/essential-scala/essential-scala.html)

> Class provides a template for creating objects.

In Python, the instantiated instance of a class is object. Moreover, the Class definition itself is also an object. The second
part is critical for us if we want to templatize some code because we can create another layer of "template" of our code. 
Metaclass is built to create such second layer. In other words, 

> Metaclass is a template for creating classes. 

To define a metaclass, you need to derive from `type` instead of `object`. 

```python
class Meta(type):
    def __new__(cls, name, bases, dct):
        x = super().__new__(cls, name, bases, dct)
        x.meta_name = "my_meta"
        return x
```

Then you're free to create a list of classes out of the `Meta`:

```python
class Class1(metaclass=Meta):
    pass

class Class2(metaclass=Meta):
    pass
```

After that, the class attributes can be fetched directly, or from instantiated instances.
```python
c1 = Class1()
c2 = Class2()
print(c1.meta_name)     # my_meta
print(Class1.meta_name) # my_meta
```
